Guidance for ISO national standards bodies
Engaging stakeholders and building consensus 
ISO in brief
ISO has a membership of 163* national
standards bodies from countries large and
small, industrialized, developing and in transition, in all regions of the world.
ISO’s portfolio of over 18 500* standards
provides business, government and society
with practical tools for all three dimensions
of sustainable development: economic, environmental and social.
ISO standards make a positive contribution
to the world we live in. They facilitate trade,
spread knowledge, disseminate innovative
advances in technology, and share good
management and conformity assessment
practices.
ISO standards provide solutions and
achieve benefits for almost all sectors of
activity, including agriculture, construction,
mechanical engineering, manufacturing,
distribution, transport, medical devices, information and communication technologies,
the environment, energy, quality management, conformity assessment and services.
ISO only develops standards for which there
is a clear market requirement. The work is
carried out by experts in the subject drawn
directly from the industrial, technical and
business sectors that have identified the
need for the standard, and which subsequently put the standard to use. These
experts may be joined by others with relevant knowledge, such as representatives of
government agencies, testing laboratories,
consumer associations and academia, and
by international governmental and nongovernmental organizations.
An ISO International Standard represents a
global consensus on the state of the art in
the subject of that standard.
* In October 2010.
International Organization for Standardization
1, chemin de la Voie-Creuse
Case postale 56
CH-1211 Genève 20
Switzerland
Tel. +41 22 749 01 11
Fax +41 22 733 34 30
E-mail central@iso.org
Web www.iso.org
Guidance for ISO national standards bodies
Engaging stakeholders and building consensus
a
Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies 3
a
Contents
Section 1
About the ISO Technical
Management Board Process
Evaluation Group (PEG)
5
Section 2
ISO/TMB PEG Task 2 – Why is it
important ? Why is it being pursued ?
6
Section 3
Principles and guidance on
stakeholder engagement
and consensus decision-making for
ISO liaison organizations
8
3.1 Stakeholder engagement
for new ISO projects
8
3.2 Stakeholder engagement
and consensus decision-making
on ISO work
9
3.3 National participation at ISO
standards development meetings
12
3.4 Establishment and operations
of national mirror committees
13
3.5 Leadership of national
mirror committees
14
Annex A
PEG Task 2 – Input collection
methodology and summary
observations
17
Guidance for ISO national standards bodies
Engaging stakeholders and building consensus
Why an owl ?
Why an owl to symbolize the work of the ISO/TMB
Process Evaluation Group ? Because owls have a
reputation for wisdom and seem to have a critical,
evaluative look…

Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies 5
a
Section 1
About the ISO Technical Management Board Process Evaluation Group (PEG)
In recent years, to be responsive to both
current and new stakeholder needs and to
maintain itself as a highly relevant International Standards developer, ISO has seen
its work programme expand and evolve
into new subject areas. Compelling challenges for ISO regarding its standards
development processes have come with
this evolution, as stakeholder expectations
of the ISO system are changing.
As a result, the ISO Technical Management
Board (ISO/ TMB) has formed its Process
Evaluation Group (PEG) to investigate
the responsiveness of the ISO standards
development processes to these changing
dynamics. The ultimate intent of the PEG’s
efforts is to safeguard the outcomes of
the ISO system and to promote the existing value, strength and authority of International Standards and the processes
by which they are produced. Indeed, the
ISO/ TMB agreed that the PEG, in its work,
must uphold the commitment of the ISO
system to participation via national standards bodies (NSBs), as well as through the
consideration of the input received from
liaison organizations.
Essentially the PEG has two main tasks :
Task 1
•	 To review the current situation and
consider the possibility of alternative
models1) of standards development operations and participation in ISO2).
Task 2
•	 To examine processes for consensus
decision-making and stakeholder engagement within national standards
bodies (NSBs) and liaison organizations,
which may impact the credibility of resulting ISO standards 3).
Please note that this document is a result
of the PEG’s pursuit of Task 2 above.
1) It is important to note that, in the majority of cases, the existing ISO model works well, is well defined and is accepted by
stakeholders.
2) It is anticipated that the PEG will provide recommendations to
the ISO/TMB for action on this task by February 2011.
3) It was anticipated that the PEG would provide recommendations to the ISO/TMB for action on this item by September 2010.
6 Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies
a
Section 2
ISO/TMB PEG Task 2 – Why is it important ? Why is it being pursued ?
Any discussion of the rationale for PEG
Task 2 must begin by recognizing the following important statements made in ISO
governance documents :
“ISO members are committed to developing globally relevant International Standards
by... Organizing national input in a timely
and effective manner, taking into account
all relevant interests at national level...”
“ISO parties are committed to... Communicating in a fair and transparent manner to
interested parties when work on new standards is initiated and subsequently on the
progress of their development...”
From the ISO Code of Ethics, 2004
“For the ISO work in which they choose to
participate, ISO members are expected to
organize national consultation mechanisms,
according to their national needs and possibilities, which prepare national positions
that reflect a balance of their country’s
national interests...”
From the List of Fundamental Principles
of the ISO System, 1999
“...National bodies have the responsibility
of ensuring that their technical standpoint
is established taking account of all interests concerned at national level...”
From the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1,
Foreword, Item C on Discipline
In addition, ISO/IEC Guide 59:1994, Code
of good practice for standardization, states
the following under clause 6.3 :
“At international level, national participation
in the standardization process is organized
under the auspices of the appropriate national standards body which is the member
of the relevant international standards organization. National members shall ensure
that their participation reflects a balance
of national interests in the subject matter
to which the international standardization
activity relates.”
Generally, ISO processes and national body
engagement have been viewed as successful to result in ISO standards reflecting a
double level of consensus – among market
players and experts at the drafting stages
of the standards, and among countries at
the formal voting stages of the standards.
However, recently within some ISO
activities there have been some concerns expressed regarding the integrit y of ISO national body processes for
stakeholder engagement and consensus decision making. The credibilit y
of these national processes is vital to
ensure the credibilit y of the resulting
ISO standards and, ultimately, of the
ISO brand in the marketplace. It is important to recognize that the ISO standards
development process is one that is collectively owned and implemented by ISO and
its members in accordance with broadly
accepted principles and guidance.
It is important to consider that international
and some broadly based regional organizations also make active contributions to the
development of ISO standards as recognized liaisons. Therefore, if the credibilit y
of internal processes of national bodies has an impact on the credibilit y 
Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies 7
a
of ISO standards and ISO itself, then
in principle, the same is true for the
internal processes of organizations in
liaison and their input.
It is for this reason that the PEG has
decided to seek input from ISO national
bodies and liaison organizations on their
internal processes for stakeholder engagement and consensus decision making. The
process for collecting input and summar y
obser vations of that input is detailed in
Annex A to this document. Through consideration of this input, the PEG has developed the principles and guidance presented in Section 3 of this document.
The W TO Committee on Technical Barriers
to Trade has established certain principles for the development of international
standards that should be obser ved when
international standards, guides and recommendations are elaborated, to ensure
transparency, openness, impartiality and
consensus, effectiveness and relevance,
coherence, and to address the concerns
of developing countries. The correct reference for the W TO/ TBT document providing
these principles is Decisions and Recommendations Adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade since 1
January 1995, Annex B. G/TBT/1/Rev.9, 8
September 2008. These principles, especially in relation to transparency, openness, impartiality and consensus, communicate important ideas that, if implemented
by standards bodies, contribute to the
credibility of the internal processes of ISO
national standards bodies and international liaison organizations. Therefore, these
ideas have been incorporated in the development of the principles and guidance
presented in Section 3 of this document.
One of the unique strengths of the ISO
system is the diversity that exists among
NSBs and liaison organizations. Such diversity is seen not just in geographic location, number of staff or annual budgets of
the NSBs or liaison organizations, but also
in the array of approaches they employ
that may be suitable to support their engagement in ISO standards development.
Differences in approach may occur for
many reasons, and may be based on differing organization operational models, stakeholder dynamics or available resources.
Embracing and sharing the range of effective approaches and good practices enriches the total ISO process, while forcing very
specific expectations on all parties may inhibit creativity, innovation and the engagement of important market players in ISO’s
work. Effective and cooperative consensus standards development must
be built on a foundation of mutual
respect and constructive collaboration
among all par ties engaged. Therefore,
ISO, NSBs and liaison organizations
benefit from diversit y of thought and
approach and from mutual respect.
Within the documents developed for this
ISO/TMB PEG task, we hope to strike a balance between helpful principles and guidance to benefit the processes of NSBs and
liaisons and recognizing and respecting the
sovereignty of NSBs and liaison organizations to determine their processes.
8 Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies
a
Section 3
Principles and guidance on stakeholder engagement
and consensus decision-making for ISO liaison organizations
3.1 Stakeholder engagement
for new ISO projects
This section provides principles and guidance to enable ISO NSBs to assess their
level of interest in, and support for, new
work proposed in ISO that does not relate to existing ISO committees and in the
absence of an existing and relevant NSB
national committee.
Principles
3.1P1 For new ISO projects, the proposer
of the initiative should indicate the
range of organizations/stakeholder
groups supporting the initiative,
as well as those that, according to
their interests and identified needs
should as a minimum be involved in
its development in order to facilitate
the arrangements of national
consensus building.
3.1P2 The range of relevant national
stakeholders to be engaged will
depend on the ISO subject and will
vary from one subject to another.
3.1P3 ISO NSBs should be committed
to informing and seeking input
from a broad range of relevant
national stakeholders on any
new ISO projects when they are
proposed.
3.1P4 All relevant national stakeholders
should be given equal access to
information and equal opportunity to
provide input.
3.1P5 Information on new ISO projects
should be provided to the national
stakeholders in a timely manner
and at the earliest appropriate
opportunity to allow all relevant
national stakeholders to access the
information, determine their interest in
it and provide input effectively by any
deadlines.
3.1P6 ISO NSBs should make provision for
a range of approaches to support
timely and effective stakeholder
engagement and participation based
on the needs of the stakeholders.
3.1P7 ISO NSBs should seek input
that represents organizational
perspectives (e.g., companies,
organizations, trade associations,
government agencies, consumer
interest groups, etc.) and/or the
perspective of individual experts.
3.1P8 ISO NSBs should be committed
to base decisions on whether to
support the proposed new work
and their level of involvement
in the ISO activity (P or O) on
consideration of the collected
input received from relevant
national stakeholders.
3.1P9 Comments submitted by NSBs
should reflect the national
consensus rather than a compilation
of all comments expressed at
the national level. Submittal of
redundant or even contradictory
comments should be avoided.
Guidance
To assist in achieving these principles, the
following guidance may be helpful :
3.1G1 ISO members should conduct a
national consultation with all relevant
stakeholders. This could take place
via a step-wise approach such as :
a) Identification of potential stakeholders – In addition to any internal processes, advertisements
and general meetings, NSBs are
encouraged to seek input on potentially relevant stakeholder from 
Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies 9
a
trade organizations, other organizations, governmental agencies,
user/consumer groups that can
complement the NSBs knowledge.
This is especially the case in a
new field for standardization
b) Providing stakeholders with information on the project proposal
c) Collecting feedback from stakeholders regarding whether there is
a need for the proposed International Standard(s). This could be
done via postal or e-mail input, or
by conducting a workshop or an
in-person meeting, teleconference
or Web-based discussion of the
proposed International Standard(s)
d) Identifying those stakeholders willing to participate in the new ISO
work on an ongoing basis.
3.1G2 Once relevant stakeholders have
been engaged in the process
and have contributed views
and comments on the proposal,
based on the input received,
the responsible individual
within the NSB should develop
a recommended response for
review and endorsement as the
NSB position and comments on
the ISO proposal.
3.1G3 There are many ways of engaging
with the relevant stakeholders,
both proactively and passively. For
example, if your organization has
a Website, details of the proposal
should be placed on the site and
a more targeted identification can
be made via notices in relevant
publications, on-line news items to
stimulate discussion, and through
already established sectors within
NSBs. Furthermore, active outreach
and communications to identified
stakeholders should be pursued.
Stakeholders in need of funding to
support their participation should
seek out sources of such funding.
3.1G4 NSBs new to active engagement in
the ISO system may wish to seek
advice and best practices from other
NSBs who have had substantial
experience to date.
3.2 Stakeholder engagement
and consensus decisionmaking on ISO work
This section provides principles and guidance to support the efforts by NSBs related
to stakeholder engagement and consensus
decision-making in the development of national positions on ISO work on an ongoing
basis.
Principles
3.2P1 The approach by which an NSB
determines its national position is
the decision of the NSB.
3.2P2 NSBs should establish an
appropriate process to
develop national positions and
comments on ISO work, as
well as to determine the NSBs’
representation at ISO meetings.
It is recommended that national
mirror committees (NMCs) are
formed whenever possible, but
some NSBs may determine their
national positions by other means.
3.2P3 Some NSBs may already have
national committees in a field
where new international projects
are started and the NSB should
use this existing national
committee in a capacity as an
NMC if it is interested in serving in
such a capacity and able to fulfill
the requirements of such a role.
3.2P4 Differences in approach may be
based on differing operational
models, national dynamics or
available resources. Regardless of
the specific approach used, what
is vital is that the development of
the national position is informed
by, and responsive to, the input
collected from the relevant national
stakeholders.
3.2P5 A description of how the NSB
determines its national positions
should be publicly available to
all national stakeholders or made
available to them upon request.
3.2P6 It is the responsibility of the NSB
to arrive at a national position 
10 Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies
a
that reflects and reconciles the
views of the range of its national
stakeholders that have a legitimate
interest in the ISO subject.
3.2P7 At times the development of a
national position may require
consideration of stakeholders’
interests in other related national
mirror committees.
3.2P8 Decisions within NSBs should be
taken based on the consensus
principle and such decisions
should carefully consider the
balance of interests across the
input collected from relevant
national stakeholders.
3.2P9 All relevant national stakeholders
should have equal access to
participation in the NSB’s process
for development of national
positions, and all national
stakeholders formally engaged
in the NSB’s process should be
assured of fair and equitable
treatment and consideration in that
process.
3.2P10 All relevant national stakeholders
and NSB procedures must be
committed to the development of
a national position that reflects
consensus across multiple
stakeholders and stakeholder
categories.
3.2P11 When consensus is reached among
stakeholders within an NSB on
technical content issues and on a
national position on ISO work, it is
expected that the NSB will submit
the stakeholder consensus position
and technical comments to ISO in
accordance with its established
procedures. It is recognized that
on occasion an NSB may need
to make editorial revisions for
political or legal reasons.
3.2P12 Comments submitted by NSBs
should reflect the national
consensus rather than a
compilation of all comments
expressed at the national level.
Submittal of redundant or even
contradictory comments should be
avoided.
3.2P13 When consensus is reached within
an NSB on a national position on
ISO work, all relevant national
stakeholders should respect and
support that national consensus
position within ISO activities and
at ISO meetings, and they should
not express views within the ISO
activity that may limit the success
of the national consensus position.
3.2P14 Where consensus cannot be
reached and a fundamental
objection cannot be overcome, it
is important that the NSB have a
procedure for dispute resolution or
appeals.
3.2P15 If all efforts to achieve consensus
on a national position fail and
where there is therefore no
agreement on a national position,
a position of abstention should be
submitted to ISO.
3.2P16 A P-member of an ISO committee
should represent broad national
interest.
3.2P17 If an ISO member is requesting P
membership of a committee, an
NMC or equivalent process should
be in place to determine a national
consensus position.
3.2P18 If there is very limited national
interest (e.g. one or a very small
number of stakeholders) in
the standardization area, it is
recommended that Observing O
membership should be sought.
An NSB may seek Participating
P membership in the ISO activity
provided that the limited level of
interest represents the existing and
relevant national stakeholders.
3.2P19 ISO committees and their leaders,
NSBs and liaison organizations and
their delegates and experts should
respect the consensus positions
submitted by NSBs and liaisons.
SBs with concerns regarding
the credibility of another NSB’s
consensus position, based on the
process to develop that position,
should pursue their concerns via
direct bilateral dialogue between
the concerned NSBs.
Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies 11
a
3.2P20 NSBs should periodically assess
their processes and procedures
for stakeholder engagement and
consensus-decision making on
ISO work, and seek to continually
improve them as necessary.
Guidance
To assist in achieving these principles, the following guidance may be helpful :
3.2G1 Consensus is defined in the ISO/
IEC Directives, Part 1 as: “General
agreement, characterized by the
absence of sustained opposition to
substantial issues by any important
part of the concerned interests
and by a process that involves
seeking to take into account the
views of all parties concerned
and to reconcile any conflicting
arguments. Consensus need not
imply unanimity.”
3.2G2 In practice, consensus has its origins
in the desire to achieve the general
acceptance and application of a
standard within its intended sphere
of influence. This entails trying to
ensure that the interests of all those
likely to be affected by it are taken
into account and that the individual
concerns are carefully and fairly
balanced against the wider public
interest.
3.2G3 Achievement of consensus entails
recognizing the wider interest
and sometimes making certain
compromises. Arguments for and
against the existence of an ISO
project should be pursued at the
stage where the project proposal
is considered and action is taken
on it. However, once an ISO project
has been approved, all NSBs and
stakeholders involved in the process
should be committed to advancing
the global relevance of International
Standard(s) within the agreed-upon
scope, and they should not seek
to hinder its further development.
Where a member sustains a
fundamental objection and supports
it with sound arguments, these
concerns will be taken seriously.
3.2G4 NSBs have an obligation to address,
and make an effort to resolve, all
views expressed.
3.2G5 When establishing national
positions on International Standards
((committee drafts (CD), draft
International standards (DIS), final
draft International Standards (FDIS))
etc.) it is good practice for the NSB
to identify for its own records the
range of stakeholders that have been
involved in the national decisionmaking process. ISO processes
and voting questions at all stages
(proposal, CD, DIS, FDIS) should
remind NSBs that they should be
conducting broad stakeholder
consultations in the development of
positions and comments, and ask
them to verify that they are doing so.
3.2G6 When a national position has been
established, it is good practice
for the NSB to communicate this
national position to all relevant
stakeholders that have been
engaged in its development.
3.2G7 The procedure to appeal NSB
decisions should, as a first step,
promote informal and open dialogue
between the concerned parties
to attempt to resolve conflicts via
informal rather than formal means
whenever possible.
3.2G8 Any formal appeal process should
be fair and transparent and include
provisions to ensure that the
decision-makers are perceived by
the concerned parties as being
neutral on the issue in question.
3.2G9 NSBs may organize national
meetings, teleconferences or Webbased discussions to assist in the
development of national positions.
All relevant stakeholders should have
an opportunity to participate.
3.2G10 Again, as under Item 3.1G4 above,
NSBs new to active engagement in
the ISO system may wish to seek
advice and best practices from other
NSBs who have had substantial
experience to date
12 Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies
a
3.3 National participation at
ISO standards development
meetings
This section provides principles and guidance on selecting and preparing (1) national
delegation members to attend meetings
of ISO technical committees (TCs), project
committees (PCs) and subcommittees (SCs),
and (2) national experts to attend ISO working group meetings.
Principles
3.3P1 National delegations and national
experts are appointed by the NSB.
3.3P2 The identification of NSB
delegations and experts should
occur within an NMC, or by
equivalent means, within the NSB.
3.3P3 All relevant and interested
stakeholders who are members
of the NMC should be afforded
fair and equitable consideration
to serve as an NSB delegate or
expert.
3.3P4 The NSB delegation should be
able to represent all aspects of
the agreed national position. This
might entail having more than one
delegate attend the ISO meeting.
3.3P5 All members of an NSB
delegation to an ISO TC/PC/SC
meeting should be expected to
speak with one voice to advocate
for the NSB’s national position.
3.3P6 National experts to an ISO WG
should be selected on the basis of
their relevant technical expertise.
Guidance
To assist in achieving these principles, the
following guidance may be helpful :
3.3G1 National delegations should be
selected from the members of the
NMC and be actively engaged in the
work of the NMC.
3.3G2 The selection criteria may be based
on a number of factors, for example
technical expertise, effective
communication skills in language of
meeting, and active participation in
the work of the NMC.
3.3G3 National experts should be selected
and nominated through the NMC.
Though selected for their individual
technical knowledge and expertise,
such experts should be aware
of national positions in order to
minimise conflict as the project
progresses. WG experts should
regularly report to their NSB or NMC
on the progress of work within the
WG.
3.3G4 It is preferable that appointed
individuals from national delegations
and national experts be in a position
to commit the necessary time and
resources.
3.3G5 Continuity of participation in national
delegations and as WG experts
throughout the life-cycle of an ISO
project should be preferred and
encouraged.
3.3G6 All national delegation members or
WG experts with a financial need
should have fair and equitable
access to, and consideration for,
such funding from any source. It
should not be assumed that the
NSBs themselves will be able in all
cases to provide such funding. Any
source for such funding, should
have procedures established for
the administration of the funding
program, the application process to
acquire the funding and the criteria
for approving requests for the
funding. These procedures should
be open, transparent and available
to any relevant party for the fund.
3.3G7 National delegations should select
a head of the delegation. If another
delegate can speak to an issue
more effectively than the head of
delegation, the head of delegation
should seek to be recognized to
speak and then request the other
delegate to speak for him or her.
3.3G8 Members of national delegations and
WG experts should have sufficient
language skills to effectively
communicate in the environment of
the particular ISO committee or WG.
Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies 13
a
3.3G9 Preparation of national delegations and
national experts before meetings should
include :
a) A briefing by the NMC on national
positions (this may occur via a
physical meeting, a teleconference
or a Web-based discussion)
b) Formal or informal training on ISO
rules and procedures (e.g. ISO/IEC
Directives)
c) Access to documentation, meeting
minutes and any papers that are
relevant to the technical subject
and meeting.
3.3G10 National delegations and national
experts should maintain close
communication, which should include
a debriefing by the national delegation
members or national experts to the
NSB or NMC following the international
meeting.
3.3G11 NSBs and NMCs should very carefully
consider whether they should allow one
or a very small number of delegates
from a single organization to represent
the NSB at an ISO meeting when
the organization(s) may be the only
interested stakeholder within the NSB.
3.3G12 If new business is raised for action at
the meeting that was not appropriately
communicated to the committee in
advance of the meeting, the national
delegation should seek that such
action be deferred until effective
national consultations of all NSBs that
are P members can take place.
3.3G13 NSBs and/or their NMCs should
provide their delegates and experts
with guidance concerning how much
negotiating flexibility they have
regarding the national consensus
position and comments at an ISO TC,
SC or WG meeting. In addition, the
NSB and/or its NMC should advise
the delegates and experts as to their
positions and negotiating flexibility in
relation to positions and comments of
other NSBs.
3.4 Establishment and operations
of national mirror committees
This section provides principles and guidance
to NSBs on NMCs to ISO work, for NSBs that
choose to use an NMC approach.
Principles
3.4P1 Internal procedures for the
establishment and operations of
NMCs should exist and should be
publicly available.
3.4P2 For those NSBs who form NMCs,
an NMC should be established as
early as possible in the process to
ensure that the NSB is in a position to
respond to the ISO process.
3.4P3 Some NSBs may already have national
committees in a field where new
international projects are started
and the NSB should use this existing
national committee in a capacity as
an NMC if it is interested in serving in
such a capacity and able to fulfill the
requirements of such a role.
3.4P4 The NSB should make every effort
to identify the relevant stakeholders
that should be engaged in the NMC
and those stakeholders that the NSB
has been engaged with early in the
process, should be contacted at this
stage to ensure continuity.
3.4P5 The composition of the NMC
should demonstrate participation of
representative organizations across
the relevant stakeholders with a
legitimate interest in the ISO subject.
3.4P6 All members of the NMC should have
equal participation rights and equal
access to relevant information.
3.4P7 Attempts should be made to
achieve balance with respect to the
composition of the NMC. Procedures
should exist to safeguard against
dominance by any stakeholder or
stakeholder category.
3.4P8 Once the mirror committee has been
established, the composition of
the committee should be reviewed
regularly and additional stakeholders
may be invited to participate 
14 Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies
a
throughout the life-cycle of the ISO
work.
3.4P9 NSBs should provide suitable
information, advice or training on ISO
standardization to all members of the
NMC.
3.4P10 The NMC’s formation should be
approved by the NSB, for example
by senior management or by a
governance group made up of relevant
stakeholders.
3.4P11 NMCs should maintain records of their
decisions.
Guidance
To assist in achieving these principles, the following guidance may be helpful :
3.4G1 Relevant stakeholders to be contacted
and invited to participate will depend
on the subject matter of the ISO
activity. Examples of how this may be
approached may include enquiries,
Internet searches, networks, personal
approaches, advertisements, etc.
3.4G2 For NSB senior management or
a governance group made up of
relevant stakeholders to approve the
establishment of the NMC, the following
information should be provided:
a) Background and justification for the
ISO activity;
b) Scope of the proposed ISO activity
c) Proposed NMC membership
d) A clear statement for the level of
participation (P or O) in the ISO
activity
e) A work programme or business plan
of the ISO activity
f) A commitment of sufficient resources in place in order to establish and
operate the NMC.
3.4G3 For the purposes of openness and
transparency, the procedure for the
establishment of a NMC should be
made publicly available (e.g. through
the NSB Website, presentations,
experts communicating within the
community, etc.)
3.4G4 NMC members should be encouraged
to develop their knowledge of
standardization operations and
procedures. This could be achieved
via introductory information packages,
training and education sessions,
mentoring programs, IT tools, etc.
3.4G5 The consensus development process
of NSBs and NMCs should be open
to all who are directly and materially
affected by the standardization
activity in question. Any stakeholder
may contribute via public review and
comment without joining the NMC if
it wishes, but it is the responsibility
of the NMC to develop the national
consensus positions. This includes an
obligation to consider input received
from the public review and comment.
There should be no undue financial
barriers to participation. If a fee for
participation is charged, then it should
be reasonable and fair. A fee waiver
or fee reduction option is encouraged.
Where potential funding sources
for participating (underrepresented)
stakeholders are known, such
information should be made available
as appropriate.
3.5 Leadership of national
mirror committees
This section provides principles and guidance
for NSBs on the selection, qualifications and
training of NMC Chairs and NMC secretaries,
for NSBs that choose to use an NMC approach.
Principles
3.5P1 The selection of the chair and
secretary of a new NMC should
take place as soon as possible after
the establishment of the new ISO
committee and decision is taken to
establish a new NMC.
3.5P2 Once the establishment of the NMC
is approved, the NSB or a governance
group of relevant stakeholders may
assign the secretariat role for the
NMC to an internal staff member
or outsource the secretariat role
to an external organization. Where
the secretariat role for the NMC is
outsourced, an agreement should 
Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies 15
a
be signed between the NSB and the
external organization, and there
should be ongoing monitoring by the
NSB, to ensure good performance.
3.5P3 NMC chairs are selected on the basis
of their chairing abilities, willingness
and availability to be committed for
the duration of a project, subjectmatter knowledge and understanding
of ISO. Where possible, chairs
should be selected from amongst the
members of the NMC.
3.5P4 NMC secretaries are selected on
the basis of their knowledge of ISO
rules and procedures, availability of
adequate resources to manage the
NMC and willingness to be committed
for the duration of a project.
3.5P5 The NMC chair and secretary have
the primary responsibility to act in a
neutral manner to facilitate the NMC’s
decision-making and to ensure:
that all relevant stakeholders on the
NMC have fair and equitable access
to information, that they have an
opportunity to provide input, and that
consideration of their input is given
in the development of the national
position.
Guidance
To assist in achieving these principles, the following guidance may be helpful:
3.5G1 The selection process for NMC chairs
and secretaries is a very important
part in establishing an effective NMC.
For this reason, steps should be
taken to ensure that the selection is
highly informed, e.g. by clearly placing
the issue on the agenda of the first
meeting.
3.5G2 NMC chairs and secretaries are
appointed by the NSB, in some cases
on the basis of a nomination and
approval process within the NMC.
3.5G3 Effective chairing abilities are the most
important skills for an NMC chair.
These abilities include managing the
NMC’s decision-making processes,
effectively resolving disagreements,
guiding the NMC to consensus, and
managing meetings and discussions
that cross stakeholder categories
and perspectives. Training for NMC
chairs should, inter alia, focus on the
enhancement of these skills.
3.5G4 Extensive knowledge of ISO rules and
procedures are the most important
skills for NMC secretaries. This
includes knowledge of the ISO/
IEC Directives, the ability to use the
required IT tools and good drafting
skills. Training for secretaries should,
inter alia, focus on the enhancement of
these skills.
3.5G5 Training for both chairs and secretaries
can be provided through any number
of means such as manuals, seminars,
workshops, training courses, and
individual advice upon request. This
also includes ensuring that the NMC is
well informed regarding the expected
duties of chairs and secretaries.
3.5G6 It may be useful for the NSB to
facilitate information exchanges among
chairs and secretaries across all of the
NSB’s NMCs, to promote the sharing
of experiences and good practices.
This can be done via seminars and
workshops or via online tools.
3.5G7 NSBs have a responsibility to ensure
that chairs and secretaries are aware
of their roles and responsibilities both
nationally and internationally.
3.5G8 NSBs should also ensure that they
regularly update chairs and secretaries
on any developments or changes (e.g.
ISO/IEC Directives) that may impact the
work of the NMC.

Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies 17
a
Annex A
PEG Task 2 – Input collection methodology and summary observations
To collect input for consideration to produce Section 3 of this document, the ISO
Secretary-General issued a letter to all ISO
full members, inviting them to submit their
input on a series of questions via an online
survey tool. Of the approximately 100 ISO
full members that received this invitation,
responses were received from 41. This was
regarded as a very good survey response,
and in particular, it should be noted that
the responses showed a very good distribution of developed and developing countries, as well as geographic diversity.
The numbered items presented below represent the questions asked of ISO national
bodies, and following each question are
the PEG’s summary observations on the responses received.
1) Initiation of new ISO work
1.1) When ISO embarks on a new field of
standardization, and in the absence
of a relevant national committee, how
does your NSB assess the level of
interest, in and support for, this ISO
activity in your country ?
Summary observations :
A number of good practices were identified
within the responses – almost all conduct
some form of stakeholder engagement to
assess the level of interest within their
country. A few limit their consultations to
an assessment by staff within their respective organizations.
2) Establishment of ISO national
mirror committees
2.1) Do you have an internal procedure
for the establishment of national mirror committees to ISO activities ?
Summary observations :
Forty of 41 respondents have such a procedure.
2.2) If yes, please provide details of the
procedure.
Summary observations :
A few procedures were identified within
the responses. Some chose not to go into
detail of the procedure but advised that
a committee is established, if relevant. In
a number of the responses, it is apparent
that the national committee is considered
if the national body is approached by an
external party as opposed to a proactive
approach by the national body to identify
and create. Some respondents do not have
any (or many) national mirror committees.
2.3) Please advise if, and how, this procedure is made publicly available.
Summary observations :
It appears that in the majority of cases, the
procedures are made publicly available.
Where the procedure is not publicly available, all those involved in the development
of standardization appear to be provided
with the details.
3) Mirror committee membership
3.1) How do you identify stakeholder
groups and ensure balance of participation in your mirror committees ?
3.2) How do you determine which stakeholders will be involved
Summary observations :
Stakeholder identification is central to the
establishment of consensus positions,
but there are few specific procedures
surrounding how to do this activity and
few procedures regarding the balance of 
18 Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies
a
participation were provided in the responses
to question 3.1. Responses to question 3.2 indicated that there are also differences among
the respondents regarding the type of stakeholders that are contacted to participate.
3.3) Do your procedures allow for new members to join the mirror committee at any
time ?
Summary observations :
Forty of the 41 responses indicated that new
stakeholders may join their mirror committees
at any time.
3.4) Please describe any special resources
or approaches that support the participation of persons in particular stakeholder groups in the mirror committee.
Summary observations :
Responses on this question represented a
broad spectrum of input. Some NSBs responded that they provide special support
either in the form of training and orientation of
delegates and experts or in the form of funding to support participation in the mirror committee. Other NSBs indicated that they provide
no special support.
3.5) How do you address the composition of
mirror committees in cases where there
is limited but strong interest in your
country in the outcome of an International Standard ?
Summary observations :
A number of NSBs responded that they have
no special procedures to address this issue.
Others indicated it would be unlikely that a
mirror committee would be formed and unlikely the NSB would take active participation
in an ISO activity if the interest is so limited.
Still others indicated that they would conduct
further outreach to seek more interest to participate, or they would try to proceed as much
as possible with the limited interest they have.
4) Addressing differing ISO technical
subjects in mirror committees
4.1) Do you approach the establishment and
membership of the mirror committee
differently dependent upon the subject
area and the participation level (P, O,
etc.) ?
Summary observations :
Fourteen respondents indicated that they
handle establishment and membership of mirror committees based on subject or level of
participation, and 25 respondents indicated
that they do not.
4.2) If yes, please provide details.
Summary observations :
Some responded that the process for establishing mirror committees is always the same,
but the members or stakeholder groups may
be different depending on the subject. Some
respondents indicated differing approaches in
relation to O (observer) membership, and some
indicated that, in the case of O membership,
they may not form mirror committees at all.
5) Decision-making
in mirror committees
5.1) Please describe how you take decisions
(e.g., by consensus, by voting, requirements to take decisions) in your mirror
committees.
Summary observations :
The majority of responses indicated that
decisions are taken in accordance with the
consensus principle, while some NSB mirror
committees have numeric voting procedures
to be implemented when consensus may be in
question.
5.2) Please describe what happens within
your mirror committees if agreement
cannot be reached on a decision.
Summary observations :
A variety of responses were provided, including abstaining when consensus is not
reached, instituting a numeric voting procedure if consensus is not reached or clear, and
in some cases, referring the final decision on
the NSB position to a staff person of the NSB
senior management. 
Engaging stakeholders for ISO national standards bodies 19
a
5.3) Please describe any mechanism in
place for appeals of decisions taken by
mirror committees.
Summary observations :
Most NSB responses indicated that their national mirror committee procedures contain
provisions for handling appeals. Others indicated that they had no such procedure but
that the national mirror committee would continue to discuss the item until it was resolved.
Almost all responses indicated that appeals
are referred to the parent group of the body
that took the action being appealed. This can
extend up to governance bodies of the NSB.
One respondent indicated that it handles appeals as it would customer complaints under
an ISO 9001 quality management system.
6) Participation at ISO standards
development meetings
6.1) Please describe how you select and approve your national delegation members
to meetings of ISO TCs, PCs and SCs,
and your national experts to ISO WGs.
Summary observations :
In almost all responses, the national mirror
committee decides on the members of the national delegation or the experts from the NSB
who attend ISO meetings.
6.2) Please describe how you prepare your
national delegation members to meetings of ISO TCs, PCs, SCs.
6.3) Please describe how you prepare your
national experts to meetings of ISO
WGs.
Summary observations :
In response to questions 6.2 and 6.3, most
NSBs responded that they provide all appropriate ISO committee or WG documentation to the delegates and/or experts and hold
national meetings in advance of ISO meetings
to discuss issues and determine positions
and comments to be carried forward to the
meeting. Some NSBs also provide specialized
training programs and orientation sessions to
prepare delegates and experts.
6.4) Please describe any special resources
or approaches that support the participation of persons in particular stakeholder groups in the international committee meetings.
Summary observations :
In general, responses to this question were
similar to the responses provided to question
3.4 above.
7) Mirror committee leadership
7.1) Please describe any procedure you
have for the selection and appointment
of mirror committee chairs and secretaries.
Summary observations :
In general, most responses indicated that the
mirror committee chairs are selected by the
mirror committee membership based on considerations such as: leadership skills, consensus-building, capability and expert knowledge
of the subject of the ISO committee. Generally, secretaries of mirror committees are assigned these roles by the management of the
NSB, or the management of an external organization administering the mirror committee
on behalf of the NSB.
7.2) Please describe any procedures you
have for the qualifications and responsibilities of mirror committee chairs and
secretaries.
Summary observations :
Many respondants indicated that their mirror
committee procedures contain details on the
qualifications and responsibilities of mirror
committee chairs and secretaries.
7.3) Please describe any programmes or activities you have for training or preparation of mirror committee leadership.
Summary observations :
A number of respondents indicated that they
provide orientation sessions and specialized
training courses for mirror committee leaders.
Some NSBs also organize regular conferences
of mirror committee chairs and secretaries
that provide good opportunities to network,
discuss issues of common concern and share
good practices.
International Organization for Standardization
© ISO – December 2010/3 000 – ISBN 978-92-67-10540-6
